chore(rfc): helm import (#1272)
cdk8s-team/cdk8s: rfc/helm-import.md

# Helm Import 

* **Original Author(s):** @vinayak-kukreja
* **Tracking Issue:** https://github.com/cdk8s-team/cdk8s/issues/1271
* **API Bar Raiser:** @iliapolo

Users are now able to import helm charts into their cdk8s app with `cdk8s import` command.

## Working Backwards

### README

You can add a helm chart to your cdk8s application by running:

```
cdk8s import helm:https://airflow.apache.org/airflow@1.8.0
```

Here, `airflow` is the helm chart and `1.8.0` is the chart version.

Then you can use this chart within your application:

```typescript
import { Construct } from 'constructs';
import { App, Chart, ChartProps } from 'cdk8s';
import { Airflow } from './imports/airflow';

export class MyChart extends Chart {
  constructor(scope: Construct, id: string, props: ChartProps = { }) {
    super(scope, id, props);

    new Airflow(this, 'airflow', {
      values: {
        fullnameOverride: 'Foo',
      }
    });
  }
}

const app = new App();
new MyChart(app, 'typescript-demo');
app.synth();
```

> 

Reviewer: Lets also add how the generated `airflow.ts` file will look like. This would make it clear that the values are typed.

Author: Makes sense, will add it.

> **Note:**
>

> > * You would need `Helm` to be installed on your machine for using this feature. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> * You would need `helm` to be installed on your machine for using this feature. 
```

> > * We assume that you are authenticated to access the helm chart being mentioned in the url.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> * For accessing private helm repositories, you must be authenticated to the repository in a way that the `helm pull` command recognizes.
```

Reviewer: We should also add this disclaimer to our current Helm documentation :)

Author: Good callout, on it. :)

Author: PR: https://github.com/cdk8s-team/cdk8s/pull/1411

> * If a helm chart contains a `values.schema.json` then the `values` properties within the construct properties for the chart would have specific types. For instance, in the prior example `fullnameOverride` is not of `any` type and instead is of `string` type since `airflow` chart has a `values.schema.json` file in it.

> 

Reviewer: This should be front and center - not as a note. Also lets make sure the example chart we use actually does have a `values.schema.json` file and mention that if *your* chart doesn't, the values won't be typed.

Author: I see. `airflow` does have a schema file. Are you suggesting that we emit a warning to the user if the chart they are using does not have a schema file and let them know that the value property would not be typed?

Reviewer: No I don't mean with a warning - just in the documentation.

## Internal FAQ

### Why are we doing this?

Our current support for including helm charts to cdk8s app adds churn for the user to setup the [Helm construct](https://cdk8s.io/docs/latest/basics/helm/) and pass in values to the construct. This feature would have two advantages over the current solution:
1. It would make it easier for the user to setup a construct for helm charts. They would just need to run the `cdk8s import` command with a valid url and we would auto generate the construct for them.
2. If a `values.schema.json` file is present in the helm chart that the user is referring, then our generated construct would have type safe values properties. This is not supported in Helm construct currently.

### Why should we _not_ do this?

As mentioned above, we do currently have a [solution]((https://cdk8s.io/docs/latest/basics/helm/)) for including helm charts in cdk8s app. The proposed feature is definitely an enhancement but would take up developers time and effort to implement and maintain.

### What is the technical solution (design) of this feature?

#### Helm chart url

The following would be the format for a helm url being passed into the import command:

```

> cdk8s import helm:<repo-url>/<chart-name>@<chart-version>

Reviewer: Are you assuming that the chart name is the last element separated by a `/`? Is this always true? Is this what `helm pull` assumes?

Reviewer: Instead of assuming it. I would just treat whatever is between `helm:` and `@` as the "thing" you pass on to `helm pull` - then to get the chart name, just look for the Chart.yaml file in the output of `helm pull`.

Author: Hey, I think this `helm:<repo-url>/<chart-name>@<chart-version>` should be our syntax for providing a url. The reason for this being, 
* `repo-url` would be the chart repository url, like `https://charts.bitnami.com/bitnami` and this in `helm pull` is passed in with the `--repo` flag.
* `chart-name` is used to get a particular chart from the repo. 
For instance,
```
helm pull mysql --repo https://charts.bitnami.com/bitnami/
```

------

`helm pull` either accepts `absolute URLs(https://charts.bitnami.com/bitnami/mysql-9.10.10.tgz)` or `repo/chartname`(which is what we have after adding the repo like [this](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/bitnami/mysql?modal=install)). 

I can run the `helm repo add` for adding the chart and then pulling it, but I was avoiding it so that `helm pull` does not change anything locally for the user. 

-----

Do you think `helm:<repo-url>/<chart-name>@<chart-version>` could be restricting since we do not know what urls are possible?

Author: Ohh, I see we do callout, `helm repo add` with our current helm implementation. We can do the same for this. WDYT?

Link: https://github.com/cdk8s-team/cdk8s/blob/master/docs/basics/helm.md?plain=1#L14

Author: Synced offline and we are moving forward with `helm:<repo-url>/<chart-name>@<chart-version>` syntax.

    this.chartSchemaPath = path.join(this.tmpDir, this.chartName, this.schemaFileName);
  } else {
    this.chartSchemaPath = undefined;
  }
```

> **Note:**
>
> After the typescript code generation is successful, we would cleanup the temporary directory created which had the helm chart.
>   ```typescript
>    /**
>     * Cleanup temp directory created
>     * @param tmpDir Temporary directory path
>     */
>    function cleanup(tmpDir: string) {
>       fs.rmSync(tmpDir, { recursive: true });
>    }
>   ```

#### Code Generation

ImportBase class has abstract methods [moduleNames](https://github.com/cdk8s-team/cdk8s-cli/blob/2.x/src/import/base.ts#L40) and [generateTypeScript](https://github.com/cdk8s-team/cdk8s-cli/blob/2.x/src/import/base.ts#L42). As part of the new class `ImportHelm` we also need to define these. Because, when the [import](https://github.com/cdk8s-team/cdk8s-cli/blob/2.x/src/import/base.ts#L44) function is [invoked]((https://github.com/cdk8s-team/cdk8s-cli/blob/2.x/src/import/dispatch.ts#L17)), it invokes the [generateTypeScript](https://github.com/cdk8s-team/cdk8s-cli/blob/2.x/src/import/base.ts#L80-L82) function. 

```typescript

>   public get moduleNames() {

Reviewer: Can you explain what this method is used for and why you decided you return the chart name? is this the name of the generated `.ts` file?

Author: Yes, I used it here since this would be used for name of the generated file. Although, now I see that `module` does not sound correct for this.

Author: Link: https://github.com/cdk8s-team/cdk8s-cli/blob/2.x/src/import/base.ts#L40

    * It's constructor/initializer.
  * A `values` property `struct` if schema is defined.
  * An interface representing properties of the construct.

```typescript
export function generateHelmConstruct(typegen: TypeGenerator, def: HelmObjectDefinition) {

  const chartName = TypeGenerator.normalizeTypeName(def.chartName);
  const schema = def.schema;
  const repoUrl = def.chartUrl;
  const chartVersion = def.chartVersion;

  typegen.emitCustomType(chartName, code => {                   // <--------------- Creating custom type

    const valuesInterface = `${chartName}ValuesProps`;          // <--------------- Creating 'values' struct
    if (schema !== undefined) {
      typegen.emitType(valuesInterface, schema, def.fqn);
    }

    emitPropsInterface();                                       // <--------------- Creating construct properties

    code.line();

    emitConstruct();                                            // <--------------- Creating construct for helm chart

    function emitPropsInterface() {
      code.openBlock(`export interface ${chartName}Props`);

      code.line('readonly chart?: string;');
      code.line('readonly repo?: string;');

>       code.line('readonly version?: string;');

Reviewer: These shouldn't be part of the interface though. We should just set them to the value (that we already know) and use them in the implementation.

Author: Ahh, correct. Will change it.

* **--helm as a flag**

  Instead of using `cdk8s import helm:url`, I initially thought of using a flag `--helm` where if present, it would mean that the url is supposed to be leading to a helm chart. This adds a flag to the import command and keeping it as `helm:` makes it similar to what we have for `github:`.

* **Reusing ApiObjectDefinition**

  In the proposed solution, I have added `HelmObjectDefinition` as an interface instead of reusing and adding to [ApiObjectDefinition](https://github.com/cdk8s-team/cdk8s-cli/blob/2.x/src/import/codegen.ts#L10-L37). I think the two interface represent different things and it would not make sense to combine them for this feature.

### What are the drawbacks of this solution?

* **Interface similar to HelmProps**
  
  As mentioned in the previous sections, there is an interface similar to HelmProps in the proposed solution due to a jsii limitation. We can use `mgrain's` [project](https://github.com/mrgrain/jsii-struct-builder) to reduce code but the emitted interface would still be similar to HelmProps. 

* **Multiple values.schema.json**

>   We are considering only the `values.schema.json` present at the root of the chart since helm by default looks for `values.yaml` at the root of the chart. I have seen multiple values.yaml files in a chart's sub-folders and these can have schema associated with them. 

Reviewer: Can you give an example?

Author: I was not able to find the chart that I encountered this in, will keep looking. 

But, I found a [GH issue](https://github.com/helm/helm/issues/11815) for requesting support for multiple schema files and that was not entertained. So I probably misunderstood.

Reviewer: I think you might have seen sub-charts. However, this does bring up the question of what to do with sub charts? 

If a chart has sub-charts, we need to make sure those sub-charts can be configured as well. And if the sub-chart has a `values.schema.json` - that configuration should be typed as well. Lets talk about this online.

  We can combine all the schema files we find in a chart to one schema file and code generate on it. But there can be conflicts in doing this.

* **Limiting values properties**

  Building on previous point, if we just include one schema file for code generation, it can lead to missing properties that the user is able to provision for manually when using `values.yaml` file. 

  To resolve this, we can add an `additionalProperties` property to `values` which can get any additional property a user wants to add other than the auto generated properties.

### What is the high-level project plan?

* Addressing the open issues.
* Implementing the feature and adding tests for it. 

> * Initially this feature can be marked as experimental for the users. In this time we can keep track of issues being created for the feature and if there are feature requests for it.

Reviewer: Feels a little too narrow to be treated as experimental. I think can just go stable from the start.
